docs(news): Trim and reorganize NEWS (#284)
eitsupi/neo-r-polars: NEWS.md

# NEWS

## polars 1.0.0

This is a completely rewritten new version of the polars R package. It improves
the internal structure of the package and catches up with Python Polars' API.
At the time of writing, this version of R Polars matches Python Polars 1.31.0.

Therefore it contains many breaking changes compared to the previous R Polars
implementation. Some of those breaking changes are explained below, but many
others are due to modifications of function names, argument names, or argument
positions. There are too many to list here, so you should refer to the [Python
Polars API docs](https://docs.pola.rs/api/python/dev/reference/index.html).

Installation instructions for the rewritten version are now identical to the
instructions for the old version. The old version (referred to as `polars0` in
the docs) can be installed from R-universe with:

```r
Sys.setenv(NOT_CRAN = "true")
install.packages("polars0", repos = "https://rpolars.r-universe.dev")
```

### Breaking changes

> * The class names of `polars` objects have changed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The class names of polars objects have changed:
```

  - `RPolarsLazyFrame` -> `polars_lazy_frame`
  - `RPolarsDataFrame` -> `polars_data_frame`
  - `RPolarsSeries` -> `polars_series`
  - `RPolarsExpr` -> `polars_expr`

* Conversion from unknown classes to Polars objects now fails. Developers can

>   specify how those objects should be handled by `polars` by creating a method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  specify how those objects should be handled by polars by creating a method
```

>   for `as_polars_series.<my-object>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for `as_polars_series.my_class`.
```

  ```r
  ### OLD
  a <- 1
  class(a) <- "foo"
  as_polars_series(a)
  #> polars Series: shape: (1,)
  #> Series: '' [f64]
  #> [
  #>         1.0
  #> ]
  ```

  ```r
  ### NEW
  a <- 1
  class(a) <- "foo"
  as_polars_series(a)
  #> Error:
  #> a <foo> object can't be converted to a polars Series.
  #> Run `rlang::last_trace()` to see where the error occurred.
  ```

> * Conversion from `polars` to R types has been revamped: `$to_r()`, `$to_list()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Conversion from polars objects to R vectors has been revamped: `$to_r()`, `$to_list()`
```

  and `$to_data_frame()` no longer exist. Instead, you must use `as.data.frame()`,
  `as.list()` and `as.vector()`.

  `as.vector()` will remove attributes that might be useful, for instance to

>   convert Int64 values using the `bit64` package or to convert Time values using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  convert Int64 values using the bit64 package or to convert Time values using
```

>   the `hms` package. If finer control is needed, use either `$to_r_vector()` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the hms package. If finer control is needed, use either `$to_r_vector()` or
```

  set options for the entire session with `polars_options()`.

> * In general, `polars` now uses dots (`...`) in two scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In general, polars now uses dots (`...`) in two scenarios:
```

      df$with_columns(pl$col("a")$shift(1, fill_value = 3))
      #> shape: (4, 1)
      #> ┌─────┐
      #> │ a   │
      #> │ --- │
      #> │ f64 │
      #> ╞═════╡
      #> │ 3.0 │
      #> │ 1.0 │
      #> │ 2.0 │
      #> │ 3.0 │
      #> └─────┘
      ```

* Related to the extended use of dynamic dots, `pl$DataFrame()` and
  `pl$LazyFrame()` more accurately convert input to the correct datatype, for
  instance when the input is an R `data.frame`:

  ```r
  ### OLD
  pl$DataFrame(data.frame(x = 1, y = "a"))
  #> shape: (1, 2)
  #> ┌─────┬─────┐
  #> │ x   ┆ y   │
  #> │ --- ┆ --- │
  #> │ f64 ┆ str │
  #> ╞═════╪═════╡
  #> │ 1.0 ┆ a   │
  #> └─────┴─────┘
  ```

  ```r
  ### NEW
  pl$DataFrame(data.frame(x = 1, y = "a"))
  #> shape: (1, 1)
  #> ┌───────────┐
  #> │           │
  #> │ ---       │
  #> │ struct[2] │
  #> ╞═══════════╡
  #> │ {1.0,"a"} │
  #> └───────────┘

  pl$DataFrame(!!!data.frame(x = 1, y = "a"))
  #> shape: (1, 2)
  #> ┌─────┬─────┐
  #> │ x   ┆ y   │
  #> │ --- ┆ --- │
  #> │ f64 ┆ str │
  #> ╞═════╪═════╡
  #> │ 1.0 ┆ a   │
  #> └─────┴─────┘
  ```

  Use `as_polars_df()` and `as_polars_lf()` to convert existing R `data.frame`s

>   to their `polars` equivalents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to their polars equivalents.
```

* The class names `PTime` and `rpolars_raw_list` (used to handle time and binary
  variables) are removed. One should use the classes provided in packages

>   `hms` and `blob` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  hms and blob instead.
```

  #> │ ---     ┆ ---          │
  #> │ f64     ┆ list[binary] │
  #> ╞═════════╪══════════════╡
  #> │ 43200.0 ┆ [b"\x01"]    │
  #> │ null    ┆ []           │
  #> │ 50400.0 ┆ [b"\x02"]    │
  #> └─────────┴──────────────┘

  # Polars to R
  tibble::as_tibble(pl_df)
  #> # A tibble: 3 × 2
  #>    time binary
  #>   <dbl> <list>
  #> 1 43200 <rplrs_r_ [1]>
  #> 2    NA <rplrs_r_ [0]>
  #> 3 50400 <rplrs_r_ [1]>
  ```

  ```r
  ### NEW
  r_df <- tibble::tibble(
    time = hms::as_hms(c("12:00:00", NA, "14:00:00")),
    binary = blob::as_blob(c(1L, NA, 2L)),
  )

  ## R to Polars
  pl_df <- as_polars_df(r_df)
  pl_df
  #> shape: (3, 2)
  #> ┌──────────┬─────────┐
  #> │ time     ┆ binary  │
  #> │ ---      ┆ ---     │
  #> │ time     ┆ binary  │
  #> ╞══════════╪═════════╡
  #> │ 12:00:00 ┆ b"\x01" │
  #> │ null     ┆ null    │
  #> │ 14:00:00 ┆ b"\x02" │
  #> └──────────┴─────────┘

  ## Polars to R
  tibble::as_tibble(pl_df)
  #> # A tibble: 3 × 2
  #>   time      binary
  #>   <time>    <blob>
  #> 1 12:00  <raw 1 B>
  #> 2    NA         NA
  #> 3 14:00  <raw 1 B>
  ```

### Other changes

* R objects that convert to a Series of length 1 are now treated like scalar

>   values when converting to `polars` Expr:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  values when converting to polars expressions:
```

  ```r
  ### OLD
  series <- pl$Series("foo", 1)
  pl$DataFrame(bar = 1:2)$with_columns(series)
  #> [...truncated...]
  #> Encountered the following error in Rust-Polars:
  #>     	Series foo, length 1 doesn't match the DataFrame height of 2
  #>
  #>     If you want expression: Series[foo] to be broadcasted, ensure it is a
  #>     scalar (for instance by adding '.first()').
  ```

  ```r
  ### NEW
  series <- pl$Series("foo", 1)
  pl$DataFrame(bar = 1:2)$with_columns(series)
  #> shape: (2, 2)
  #> ┌─────┬─────┐
  #> │ bar ┆ foo │
  #> │ --- ┆ --- │
  #> │ i32 ┆ f64 │
  #> ╞═════╪═════╡
  #> │ 1   ┆ 1.0 │
  #> │ 2   ┆ 1.0 │
  #> └─────┴─────┘
  ```

> * `map_batches()` still exists but its usage is discouraged. This function is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `<expr>$map_batches()` still exists but its usage is discouraged. This function is
```

  not guaranteed to interact correctly with the streaming engine. To apply
  functions from external packages or custom functions that cannot be translated

>   to polars syntax, we now recommend converting the data to a `data.frame` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to polars syntax, we now recommend converting the data to an R DataFrame and
```

Author: Disagree on this, I don't remember seeing any other packages where this syntax is used.

Reviewer: Ok.

>   using the parallel framework of `purrr` (>= 1.1.0) for efficiency. The vignette

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  using the parallel framework of purrr (>= 1.1.0) for efficiency. The vignette
```

I don't think it is a good idea to assume parallelism here.
Simply `lapply()` should be sufficient in many cases.

How about mentioning something like "parallelization is possible when using purrr"?

Author: Now:

>  we now recommend converting the data to a `data.frame` and  using purrr (note that as of 1.1.0, purrr enables parallel computation).
